# Quantum systems close to integrability
Data repository for the NCN PRELUDIUM 2023/49/N/ST3/01033 project "Quantum systems close to integrability", realized at Wrocław University of Science and Technology.

## Project description 
A widely disputed problem in modern physics is the reconciliation of irreversible thermodynamics with unitary, time-reversible dynamics predicted by quantum mechanics. It is the question of whether an isolated quantum system will ‘forget’ about its initial, non-equilibrium state. Lately, this problem has attracted much attention, especially given experimental evidence of the loss of information, or thermalization, in isolated systems. Scrambling of quantum information and decoherence has been known for a long time to be one of the most important hindrances to a functional and scalable quantum computer. Given the possible applications of such devices, both purely scientific and commercial, controlling thermalization in isolated quantum systems could be the next groundbreaking discovery.
Our present understanding is based on the Eigenstate Thermalization Hypothesis (ETH), which relates long-time expectation values to the predictions of statistical mechanics. As of now, there is no rigorous proof of the validity of ETH in general and we need to rely on mostly numerical clues, thus we turn our attention to systems which explicitly violate ETH. There are a few known classes of such models: integrable quantum systems (IQS), systems with ‘scars’, which freeze thermalization for some rare but relevant states, disordered, many-body interacting systems and others. As the thermalization in those systems is slowed down or even completely stopped, they could preserve information about the initial state for an arbitrarily long time. This behavior is in strong contrast with what is usually observed in generic interacting, many-body systems, namely fast dynamics on the time scales of tens of femtoseconds.
Often integrability of quantum systems relies on a fine-tuned set of parameters. Any deviation from these parameters, e.g. in the form of some perturbation, can easily destroy the integrability and render approaches typical to IQS inapplicable, as often happens in most experimental setups. A general expectation for such nearly integrable quantum systems (NIQS) is that in the thermodynamic limit, an arbitrarily small perturbation should restore chaotic dynamics, which leads to thermalization. However, there are some reports about surviving traces of integrability, e.g. in the form of residual quasiconserved quantities. Unfortunately, in most cases numerical methods can only access finite systems and indirect transitions to infinite system sizes, such as finite-size scaling, pose great difficulties when executed properly, e.g. first thermodynamic limit and then infinite time limit. Hence, it is important to first gain a deep understanding of weakly-perturbed finite systems. The main goal of this project is the investigation of the mostly unknown border between ETH and non-ergodic regimes, with emphasis placed on finite IQS and their perturbed counterparts - NIQS. We shall adopt a twofold approach to this problem:

1. Study the relaxation of physically relevant observables in NI systems and understand the characteristic timescales governing the decay, especially whether there is always a single relevant timescale or a multi-scale relaxation scenario is necessary. Our preliminary study [1] suggests that asymptotic dynamics can be described in terms of a complete set of orthogonal, local slowly relaxing operators (LSRO) and corresponding relaxation times. However, contrary to the usual reasoning based on Mazur bound, the relevant set of LSROs is not arbitrary but determined by the perturbation.

2. Study tight binding systems beyond nearest neighbors, such as systems with long-range interactions or quasi-1D systems, in search of residues of integrability. Our preliminary study of a 1D Heisenberg chain with power-law like interactions, revealed transient ballistic spin transport along a sharp line in parameter space, even though the model is not integrable [2]. A possible explanation is that in that regime this system is close to some unknown integrable system and thus should be understood as a NIQS. 

Parallel to those two tasks we shall also pursue a better numerical scheme for the detection of local integrals of motions (LIOMs) in IQS and LSROs in NIQS, by combining an algorithm based on exact diagonalization [3] with Lanczos time evolution and Quantum Typicality.

[1] M. Mierzejewski et al., SciPost Phys. 13, 013 (2022)

[2] M. Mierzejewski et al., PRB 107, 045134 (2023)

[3] M. Mierzejewski et al., PRL 114, 140601 (2015)
